<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 class="chap">
				<a name="ch36">CHAPTER XXXVI<br/>
				<br/>
				ADAIR</a>
			</h3>
			<p>On the same morning Mike met Adair for the first time.</p>
			<p>He was going across to school with Psmith and Jellicoe, when a group of three came out of the gate of the house next door.</p>
			<p>“That’s Adair,” said Jellicoe, “in the middle.”</p>
			<p>His voice had assumed a tone almost of awe.</p>
			<p>“Who’s Adair?” asked Mike.</p>
			<p>“Captain of cricket, and lots of other things.”</p>
			<p>Mike could only see the celebrity’s back. He had broad shoulders and wiry, light hair, almost white. He walked well, as if he were used to running. Altogether a fit-looking sort of man. Even Mike’s jaundiced eye saw that.</p>
			<p>As a matter of fact, Adair deserved more than a casual glance. He was that rare type, the natural leader. Many boys and men, if accident, or the passage of time, places them in a position where they are expected to lead, can handle the job without disaster; but that is a very different thing from being a born leader. Adair was of the sort that comes to the top by sheer force of character and determination. He was not naturally clever at work, but he had gone at it with a dogged resolution which had carried him up the school, and landed him high in the Sixth. As a cricketer he was almost entirely self-taught. Nature had given him a good eye, and left the thing at that. Adair’s doggedness had triumphed over her failure to do her work thoroughly. At the cost of more trouble than most people give to their life-work he had made himself into a bowler. He read the authorities, and watched first-class players, and thought the thing out on his own account, and he divided the art of bowling into three sections. First, and most important⁠—pitch. Second on the list⁠—break. Third⁠—pace. He set himself to acquire pitch. He acquired it. Bowling at his own pace and without any attempt at break, he could now drop the ball on an envelope seven times out of ten.</p>
			<p>Break was a more uncertain quantity. Sometimes he could get it at the expense of pitch, sometimes at the expense of pace. Some days he could get all three, and then he was an uncommonly bad man to face on anything but a plumb wicket.</p>
			<p>Running he had acquired in a similar manner. He had nothing approaching style, but he had twice won the mile and half-mile at the Sports off elegant runners, who knew all about stride and the correct timing of the sprints and all the rest of it.</p>
			<p>Briefly, he was a worker. He had heart.</p>
			<p>A boy of Adair’s type is always a force in a school. In a big public school of six or seven hundred, his influence is felt less; but in a small school like Sedleigh he is like a tidal wave, sweeping all before him. There were two hundred boys at Sedleigh, and there was not one of them in all probability who had not, directly or indirectly, been influenced by Adair. As a small boy his sphere was not large, but the effects of his work began to be apparent even then. It is human nature to want to get something which somebody else obviously values very much; and when it was observed by members of his form that Adair was going to great trouble and inconvenience to secure a place in the form eleven or fifteen, they naturally began to think, too, that it was worth being in those teams. The consequence was that his form always played hard. This made other forms play hard. And the net result was that, when Adair succeeded to the captaincy of football and cricket in the same year, Sedleigh, as Mr. Downing, Adair’s house-master and the nearest approach to a cricket-master that Sedleigh possessed, had a fondness for saying, was a keen school. As a whole, it both worked and played with energy.</p>
			<p>All it wanted now was opportunity.</p>
			<p>This Adair was determined to give it. He had that passionate fondness for his school which every boy is popularly supposed to have, but which really is implanted in about one in every thousand. The average public-school boy <i>likes</i> his school. He hopes it will lick Bedford at footer and Malvern at cricket, but he rather bets it won’t. He is sorry to leave, and he likes going back at the end of the holidays, but as for any passionate, deep-seated love of the place, he would think it rather bad form than otherwise. If anybody came up to him, slapped him on the back, and cried, “Come along, Jenkins, my boy! Play up for the old school, Jenkins! The dear old school! The old place you love so!” he would feel seriously ill.</p>
			<p>Adair was the exception.</p>
			<p>To Adair, Sedleigh was almost a religion. Both his parents were dead; his guardian, with whom he spent the holidays, was a man with neuralgia at one end of him and gout at the other; and the only really pleasant times Adair had had, as far back as he could remember, he owed to Sedleigh. The place had grown on him, absorbed him. Where Mike, violently transplanted from Wrykyn, saw only a wretched little hole not to be mentioned in the same breath with Wrykyn, Adair, dreaming of the future, saw a colossal establishment, a public school among public schools, a lump of human radium, shooting out Blues and Balliol Scholars year after year without ceasing.</p>
			<p>It would not be so till long after he was gone and forgotten, but he did not mind that. His devotion to Sedleigh was purely unselfish. He did not want fame. All he worked for was that the school should grow and grow, keener and better at games and more prosperous year by year, till it should take its rank among <i>the</i> schools, and to be an Old Sedleighan should be a badge passing its owner everywhere.</p>
			<p>“He’s captain of cricket and footer,” said Jellicoe impressively. “He’s in the shooting eight. He’s won the mile and half two years running. He would have boxed at Aldershot last term, only he sprained his wrist. And he plays fives jolly well!”</p>
			<p>“Sort of little tin god,” said Mike, taking a violent dislike to Adair from that moment.</p>
			<p>Mike’s actual acquaintance with this all-round man dated from the dinner-hour that day. Mike was walking to the house with Psmith. Psmith was a little ruffled on account of a slight passage-of-arms he had had with his form-master during morning school.</p>
			<p>“ ‘There’s a P before the Smith,’ I said to him. ‘Ah, P. Smith, I see,’ replied the goat. ‘Not Peasmith,’ I replied, exercising wonderful self-restraint, ‘just Psmith.’ It took me ten minutes to drive the thing into the man’s head; and when I <i>had</i> driven it in, he sent me out of the room for looking at him through my eye-glass. Comrade Jackson, I fear me we have fallen among bad men. I suspect that we are going to be much persecuted by scoundrels.”</p>
			<p>“Both you chaps play cricket, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>They turned. It was Adair. Seeing him face to face, Mike was aware of a pair of very bright blue eyes and a square jaw. In any other place and mood he would have liked Adair at sight. His prejudice, however, against all things Sedleighan was too much for him. “I don’t,” he said shortly.</p>
			<p>“Haven’t you <i>ever</i> played?”</p>
			<p>“My little sister and I sometimes play with a soft ball at home.”</p>
			<p>Adair looked sharply at him. A temper was evidently one of his numerous qualities.</p>
			<p>“Oh,” he said. “Well, perhaps you wouldn’t mind turning out this afternoon and seeing what you can do with a hard ball⁠—if you can manage without your little sister.”</p>
			<p>“I should think the form at this place would be about on a level with hers. But I don’t happen to be playing cricket, as I think I told you.”</p>
			<p>Adair’s jaw grew squarer than ever. Mike was wearing a gloomy scowl.</p>
			<p>Psmith joined suavely in the dialogue.</p>
			<p>“My dear old comrades,” he said, “don’t let us brawl over this matter. This is a time for the honeyed word, the kindly eye, and the pleasant smile. Let me explain to Comrade Adair. Speaking for Comrade Jackson and myself, we should both be delighted to join in the mimic warfare of our National Game, as you suggest, only the fact is, we happen to be the Young Archaeologists. We gave in our names last night. When you are being carried back to the pavilion after your century against Loamshire⁠—do you play Loamshire?⁠—we shall be grubbing in the hard ground for ruined abbeys. The old choice between Pleasure and Duty, Comrade Adair. A Boy’s Cross-Roads.”</p>
			<p>“Then you won’t play?”</p>
			<p>“No,” said Mike.</p>
			<p>“Archaeology,” said Psmith, with a deprecatory wave of the hand, “will brook no divided allegiance from her devotees.”</p>
			<p>Adair turned, and walked on.</p>
			<p>Scarcely had he gone, when another voice hailed them with precisely the same question.</p>
			<p>“Both you fellows are going to play cricket, eh?”</p>
			<p>It was a master. A short, wiry little man with a sharp nose and a general resemblance, both in manner and appearance, to an excitable bullfinch.</p>
			<p>“I saw Adair speaking to you. I suppose you will both play. I like every new boy to begin at once. The more new blood we have, the better. We want keenness here. We are, above all, a keen school. I want every boy to be keen.”</p>
			<p>“We are, sir,” said Psmith, with fervour.</p>
			<p>“Excellent.”</p>
			<p>“On archaeology.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Downing⁠—for it was no less a celebrity⁠—started, as one who perceives a loathly caterpillar in his salad.</p>
			<p>“Archaeology!”</p>
			<p>“We gave in our names to Mr. Outwood last night, sir. Archaeology is a passion with us, sir. When we heard that there was a society here, we went singing about the house.”</p>
			<p>“I call it an unnatural pursuit for boys,” said Mr. Downing vehemently. “I don’t like it. I tell you I don’t like it. It is not for me to interfere with one of my colleagues on the staff, but I tell you frankly that in my opinion it is an abominable waste of time for a boy. It gets him into idle, loafing habits.”</p>
			<p>“I never loaf, sir,” said Psmith.</p>
			<p>“I was not alluding to you in particular. I was referring to the principle of the thing. A boy ought to be playing cricket with other boys, not wandering at large about the country, probably smoking and going into low public-houses.”</p>
			<p>“A very wild lot, sir, I fear, the Archaeological Society here,” sighed Psmith, shaking his head.</p>
			<p>“If you choose to waste your time, I suppose I can’t hinder you. But in my opinion it is foolery, nothing else.”</p>
			<p>He stumped off.</p>
			<p>“Now <i>he’s</i> cross,” said Psmith, looking after him. “I’m afraid we’re getting ourselves disliked here.”</p>
			<p>“Good job, too.”</p>
			<p>“At any rate, Comrade Outwood loves us. Let’s go on and see what sort of a lunch that large-hearted fossil-fancier is going to give us.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
