<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLVIII: The Sleuthhound</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-48" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Sleuthhound</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>For the Doctor Watsons of this world, as opposed to the Sherlock Holmeses, success in the province of detective work must always be, to a very large extent, the result of luck. Sherlock Holmes can extract a clue from a wisp of straw or a flake of cigar-ash. But Doctor Watson has got to have it taken out for him, and dusted, and exhibited clearly, with a label attached.</p>
			<p>The average man is a Doctor Watson. We are wont to scoff in a patronising manner at that humble follower of the great investigator, but, as a matter of fact, we should have been just as dull ourselves. We should not even have risen to the modest level of a Scotland Yard Bungler. We should simply have hung around, saying:</p>
			<p>“My dear Holmes, how⁠—?” and all the rest of it, just as the downtrodden medico did.</p>
			<p>It is not often that the ordinary person has any need to see what he can do in the way of detection. He gets along very comfortably in the humdrum round of life without having to measure footprints and smile quiet, tightlipped smiles. But if ever the emergency does arise, he thinks naturally of Sherlock Holmes, and his methods.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing had read all the Holmes stories with great attention, and had thought many times what an incompetent ass Doctor Watson was; but, now that he had started to handle his own first case, he was compelled to admit that there was a good deal to be said in extenuation of Watson’s inability to unravel tangles. It certainly was uncommonly hard, he thought, as he paced the cricket field after leaving Sergeant Collard, to detect anybody, unless you knew who had really done the crime. As he brooded over the case in hand, his sympathy for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Watson increased with every minute, and he began to feel a certain resentment against Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. It was all very well for Sir Arthur to be so shrewd and infallible about tracing a mystery to its source, but he knew perfectly well who had done the thing before he started!</p>
			<p>Now that he began really to look into this matter of the alarm bell and the painting of Sammy, the conviction was creeping over him that the problem was more difficult than a casual observer might imagine. He had got as far as finding that his quarry of the previous night was a boy in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Outwood’s house, but how was he to get any farther? That was the thing. There were, of course, only a limited number of boys in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Outwood’s house as tall as the one he had pursued; but even if there had been only one other, it would have complicated matters. If you go to a boy and say, “Either you or Jones were out of your house last night at twelve o’clock,” the boy does not reply, “Sir, I cannot tell a lie⁠—I was out of my house last night at twelve o’clock.” He simply assumes the animated expression of a stuffed fish, and leaves the next move to you. It is practically Stalemate.</p>
			<p>All these things passed through <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing’s mind as he walked up and down the cricket field that afternoon.</p>
			<p>What he wanted was a clue. But it is so hard for the novice to tell what is a clue and what isn’t. Probably, if he only knew, there were clues lying all over the place, shouting to him to pick them up.</p>
			<p>What with the oppressive heat of the day and the fatigue of hard thinking, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing was working up for a brainstorm, when Fate once more intervened, this time in the shape of Riglett, a junior member of his house.</p>
			<p>Riglett slunk up in the shamefaced way peculiar to some boys, even when they have done nothing wrong, and, having capped <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing with the air of one who has been caught in the act of doing something particularly shady, requested that he might be allowed to fetch his bicycle from the shed.</p>
			<p>“Your bicycle?” snapped <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing. Much thinking had made him irritable. “What do you want with your bicycle?”</p>
			<p>Riglett shuffled, stood first on his left foot, then on his right, blushed, and finally remarked, as if it were not so much a sound reason as a sort of feeble excuse for the low and blackguardly fact that he wanted his bicycle, that he had got leave for tea that afternoon.</p>
			<p>Then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing remembered. Riglett had an aunt resident about three miles from the school, whom he was accustomed to visit occasionally on Sunday afternoons during the term.</p>
			<p>He felt for his bunch of keys, and made his way to the shed, Riglett shambling behind at an interval of two yards.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing unlocked the door, and there on the floor was the Clue!</p>
			<p>A clue that even <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Watson could not have overlooked.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing saw it, but did not immediately recognise it for what it was. What he saw at first was not a Clue, but just a mess. He had a tidy soul and abhorred messes. And this was a particularly messy mess. The greater part of the flooring in the neighbourhood of the door was a sea of red paint. The tin from which it had flowed was lying on its side in the middle of the shed. The air was full of the pungent scent.</p>
			<p>“Pah!” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing.</p>
			<p>Then suddenly, beneath the disguise of the mess, he saw the clue. A footmark! No less. A crimson footmark on the grey concrete!</p>
			<p>Riglett, who had been waiting patiently two yards away, now coughed plaintively. The sound recalled <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing to mundane matters.</p>
			<p>“Get your bicycle, Riglett,” he said, “and be careful where you tread. Somebody has upset a pot of paint on the floor.”</p>
			<p>Riglett, walking delicately through dry places, extracted his bicycle from the rack, and presently departed to gladden the heart of his aunt, leaving <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, his brain fizzing with the enthusiasm of the detective, to lock the door and resume his perambulation of the cricket field.</p>
			<p>Give <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Watson a fair start, and he is a demon at the game. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing’s brain was now working with a rapidity and clearness which a professional sleuth might have envied.</p>
			<p>Paint. Red paint. Obviously the same paint with which Sammy had been decorated. A footmark. Whose footmark? Plainly that of the criminal who had done the deed of decoration.</p>
			<p>Yoicks!</p>
			<p>There were two things, however, to be considered. Your careful detective must consider everything. In the first place, the paint might have been upset by the ground-man. It was the ground-man’s paint. He had been giving a fresh coating to the woodwork in front of the pavilion scoring-box at the conclusion of yesterday’s match. (A labour of love which was the direct outcome of the enthusiasm for work which Adair had instilled into him.) In that case the footmark might be his.</p>
			<p><i>Note one</i>: Interview the ground-man on this point.</p>
			<p>In the second place Adair might have upset the tin and trodden in its contents when he went to get his bicycle in order to fetch the doctor for the suffering MacPhee. This was the more probable of the two contingencies, for it would have been dark in the shed when Adair went into it.</p>
			<p><i>Note two</i>: Interview Adair as to whether he found, on returning to the house, that there was paint on his boots.</p>
			<p>Things were moving.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>He resolved to take Adair first. He could get the ground-man’s address from him.</p>
			<p>Passing by the trees under whose shade Mike and Psmith and Dunster had watched the match on the previous day, he came upon the Head of his house in a deck-chair reading a book. A summer Sunday afternoon is the time for reading in deck-chairs.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Adair,” he said. “No, don’t get up. I merely wished to ask you if you found any paint on your boots when you returned to the house last night?”</p>
			<p>“Paint, sir?” Adair was plainly puzzled. His book had been interesting, and had driven the Sammy incident out of his head.</p>
			<p>“I see somebody has spilt some paint on the floor of the bicycle shed. You did not do that, I suppose, when you went to fetch your bicycle?”</p>
			<p>“No, sir.”</p>
			<p>“It is spilt all over the floor. I wondered whether you had happened to tread in it. But you say you found no paint on your boots this morning?”</p>
			<p>“No, sir, my bicycle is always quite near the door of the shed. I didn’t go into the shed at all.”</p>
			<p>“I see. Quite so. Thank you, Adair. Oh, by the way, Adair, where does Markby live?”</p>
			<p>“I forget the name of his cottage, sir, but I could show you in a second. It’s one of those cottages just past the school gates, on the right as you turn out into the road. There are three in a row. His is the first you come to. There’s a barn just before you get to them.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you. I shall be able to find them. I should like to speak to Markby for a moment on a small matter.”</p>
			<p>A sharp walk took him to the cottages Adair had mentioned. He rapped at the door of the first, and the ground-man came out in his shirtsleeves, blinking as if he had just woke up, as was indeed the case.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Markby!”</p>
			<p>“Sir?”</p>
			<p>“You remember that you were painting the scoring-box in the pavilion last night after the match?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir. It wanted a lick of paint bad. The young gentlemen will scramble about and get through the window. Makes it look shabby, sir. So I thought I’d better give it a coating so as to look shipshape when the Marylebone come down.”</p>
			<p>“Just so. An excellent idea. Tell me, Markby, what did you do with the pot of paint when you had finished?”</p>
			<p>“Put it in the bicycle shed, sir.”</p>
			<p>“On the floor?”</p>
			<p>“On the floor, sir? No. On the shelf at the far end, with the can of whitening what I use for marking out the wickets, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Of course, yes. Quite so. Just as I thought.”</p>
			<p>“Do you want it, sir?”</p>
			<p>“No, thank you, Markby, no, thank you. The fact is, somebody who had no business to do so has moved the pot of paint from the shelf to the floor, with the result that it has been kicked over, and spilt. You had better get some more tomorrow. Thank you, Markby. That is all I wished to know.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing walked back to the school thoroughly excited. He was hot on the scent now. The only other possible theories had been tested and successfully exploded. The thing had become simple to a degree. All he had to do was to go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Outwood’s house⁠—the idea of searching a fellow-master’s house did not appear to him at all a delicate task; somehow one grew unconsciously to feel that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Outwood did not really exist as a man capable of resenting liberties⁠—find the paint-splashed boot, ascertain its owner, and denounce him to the headmaster. Picture, Blue Fire and “God Save the King” by the full strength of the company. There could be no doubt that a paint-splashed boot must be in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Outwood’s house somewhere. A boy cannot tread in a pool of paint without showing some signs of having done so. It was Sunday, too, so that the boot would not yet have been cleaned. Yoicks! Also Tally-ho! This really was beginning to be something like business.</p>
			<p>Regardless of the heat, the sleuthhound hurried across to Outwood’s as fast as he could walk.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
