<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV: Unpleasantness in the Small Hours</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Unpleasantness in the Small Hours</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Jellicoe, that human encyclopaedia, consulted on the probable movements of the enemy, deposed that Spiller, retiring at ten, would make for Dormitory One in the same passage, where Robinson also had a bed. The rest of the opposing forces were distributed among other and more distant rooms. It was probable, therefore, that Dormitory One would be the rendezvous. As to the time when an attack might be expected, it was unlikely that it would occur before half-past eleven. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Outwood went the round of the dormitories at eleven.</p>
			<p>“And touching,” said Psmith, “the matter of noise, must this business be conducted in a subdued and <i xml:lang="it">sotto voce</i> manner, or may we let ourselves go a bit here and there?”</p>
			<p>“I shouldn’t think old Outwood’s likely to hear you⁠—he sleeps miles away on the other side of the house. He never hears anything. We often rag half the night and nothing happens.”</p>
			<p>“This appears to be a thoroughly nice, well-conducted establishment. What would my mother say if she could see her Rupert in the midst of these reckless youths!”</p>
			<p>“All the better,” said Mike; “we don’t want anybody butting in and stopping the show before it’s half started.”</p>
			<p>“Comrade Jackson’s Berserk blood is up⁠—I can hear it sizzling. I quite agree these things are all very disturbing and painful, but it’s as well to do them thoroughly when one’s once in for them. Is there nobody else who might interfere with our gambols?”</p>
			<p>“Barnes might,” said Jellicoe, “only he won’t.”</p>
			<p>“Who is Barnes?”</p>
			<p>“Head of the house⁠—a rotter. He’s in a funk of Stone and Robinson; they rag him; he’ll simply sit tight.”</p>
			<p>“Then I think,” said Psmith placidly, “we may look forward to a very pleasant evening. Shall we be moving?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Outwood paid his visit at eleven, as predicted by Jellicoe, beaming vaguely into the darkness over a candle, and disappeared again, closing the door.</p>
			<p>“How about that door?” said Mike. “Shall we leave it open for them?”</p>
			<p>“Not so, but far otherwise. If it’s shut we shall hear them at it when they come. Subject to your approval, Comrade Jackson, I have evolved the following plan of action. I always ask myself on these occasions, ‘What would Napoleon have done?’ I think Napoleon would have sat in a chair by his washhand-stand, which is close to the door; he would have posted you by your washhand-stand, and he would have instructed Comrade Jellicoe, directly he heard the door-handle turned, to give his celebrated imitation of a dormitory breathing heavily in its sleep. He would then⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I tell you what,” said Mike, “how about tying a string at the top of the steps?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Napoleon would have done that, too. Hats off to Comrade Jackson, the man with the big brain!”</p>
			<p>The floor of the dormitory was below the level of the door. There were three steps leading down to it. Psmith lit a candle and they examined the ground. The leg of a wardrobe and the leg of Jellicoe’s bed made it possible for the string to be fastened in a satisfactory manner across the lower step. Psmith surveyed the result with approval.</p>
			<p>“Dashed neat!” he said. “Practically the sunken road which dished the Cuirassiers at Waterloo. I seem to see Comrade Spiller coming one of the finest purlers in the world’s history.”</p>
			<p>“If they’ve got a candle⁠—”</p>
			<p>“They won’t have. If they have, stand by with your water-jug and douse it at once; then they’ll charge forward and all will be well. If they have no candle, fling the water at a venture⁠—fire into the brown! Lest we forget, I’ll collar Comrade Jellicoe’s jug now and keep it handy. A couple of sheets would also not be amiss⁠—we will enmesh the enemy!”</p>
			<p>“Right ho!” said Mike.</p>
			<p>“These humane preparations being concluded,” said Psmith, “we will retire to our posts and wait. Comrade Jellicoe, don’t forget to breathe like an asthmatic sheep when you hear the door opened; they may wait at the top of the steps, listening.”</p>
			<p>“You <em>are</em> a chap!” said Jellicoe.</p>
			<p>Waiting in the dark for something to happen is always a trying experience, especially if, as on this occasion, silence is essential. Mike found his thoughts wandering back to the vigil he had kept with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wain at Wrykyn on the night when Wyatt had come in through the window and found authority sitting on his bed, waiting for him. Mike was tired after his journey, and he had begun to doze when he was jerked back to wakefulness by the stealthy turning of the door-handle; the faintest rustle from Psmith’s direction followed, and a slight giggle, succeeded by a series of deep breaths, showed that Jellicoe, too, had heard the noise.</p>
			<p>There was a creaking sound.</p>
			<p>It was pitch-dark in the dormitory, but Mike could follow the invaders’ movements as clearly as if it had been broad daylight. They had opened the door and were listening. Jellicoe’s breathing grew more asthmatic; he was flinging himself into his part with the wholeheartedness of the true artist.</p>
			<p>The creak was followed by a sound of whispering, then another creak. The enemy had advanced to the top step.⁠ ⁠… Another creak.⁠ ⁠… The vanguard had reached the second step.⁠ ⁠… In another moment⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<strong>Crash!</strong>
			</p>
			<p>And at that point the proceedings may be said to have formally opened.</p>
			<p>A struggling mass bumped against Mike’s shins as he rose from his chair; he emptied his jug on to this mass, and a yell of anguish showed that the contents had got to the right address.</p>
			<p>Then a hand grabbed his ankle and he went down, a million sparks dancing before his eyes as a fist, flying out at a venture, caught him on the nose.</p>
			<p>Mike had not been well-disposed towards the invaders before, but now he ran amok, hitting out right and left at random. His right missed, but his left went home hard on some portion of somebody’s anatomy. A kick freed his ankle and he staggered to his feet. At the same moment a sudden increase in the general volume of noise spoke eloquently of good work that was being put in by Psmith.</p>
			<p>Even at that crisis, Mike could not help feeling that if a row of this calibre did not draw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Outwood from his bed, he must be an unusual kind of housemaster.</p>
			<p>He plunged forward again with outstretched arms, and stumbled and fell over one of the on-the-floor section of the opposing force. They seized each other earnestly and rolled across the room till Mike, contriving to secure his adversary’s head, bumped it on the floor with such abandon that, with a muffled yell, the other let go, and for the second time he rose. As he did so he was conscious of a curious thudding sound that made itself heard through the other assorted noises of the battle.</p>
			<p>All this time the fight had gone on in the blackest darkness, but now a light shone on the proceedings. Interested occupants of other dormitories, roused from their slumbers, had come to observe the sport. They were crowding in the doorway with a candle.</p>
			<p>By the light of this Mike got a swift view of the theatre of war. The enemy appeared to number five. The warrior whose head Mike had bumped on the floor was Robinson, who was sitting up feeling his skull in a gingerly fashion. To Mike’s right, almost touching him, was Stone. In the direction of the door, Psmith, wielding in his right hand the cord of a dressing-gown, was engaging the remaining three with a patient smile. They were clad in pyjamas, and appeared to be feeling the dressing-gown cord acutely.</p>
			<p>The sudden light dazed both sides momentarily. The defence was the first to recover, Mike, with a swing, upsetting Stone, and Psmith, having seized and emptied Jellicoe’s jug over Spiller, getting to work again with the cord in a manner that roused the utmost enthusiasm of the spectators.</p>
			<p>Agility seemed to be the leading feature of Psmith’s tactics. He was everywhere⁠—on Mike’s bed, on his own, on Jellicoe’s (drawing a passionate complaint from that noncombatant, on whose face he inadvertently trod), on the floor⁠—he ranged the room, sowing destruction.</p>
			<p>The enemy were disheartened; they had started with the idea that this was to be a surprise attack, and it was disconcerting to find the garrison armed at all points. Gradually they edged to the door, and a final rush sent them through.</p>
			<p>“Hold the door for a second,” cried Psmith, and vanished. Mike was alone in the doorway.</p>
			<p>It was a situation which exactly suited his frame of mind; he stood alone in direct opposition to the community into which Fate had pitchforked him so abruptly. He liked the feeling; for the first time since his father had given him his views upon school reports that morning in the Easter holidays, he felt satisfied with life. He hoped, outnumbered as he was, that the enemy would come on again and not give the thing up in disgust; he wanted more.</p>
			<p>On an occasion like this there is rarely anything approaching concerted action on the part of the aggressors. When the attack came, it was not a combined attack; Stone, who was nearest to the door, made a sudden dash forward, and Mike hit him under the chin.</p>
			<p>Stone drew back, and there was another interval for rest and reflection.</p>
			<p>It was interrupted by the reappearance of Psmith, who strolled back along the passage swinging his dressing-gown cord as if it were some clouded cane.</p>
			<p>“Sorry to keep you waiting, Comrade Jackson,” he said politely. “Duty called me elsewhere. With the kindly aid of a guide who knows the lie of the land, I have been making a short tour of the dormitories. I have poured diverse jugfuls of water over Comrade Spiller’s bed, Comrade Robinson’s bed, Comrade Stone’s⁠—Spiller, Spiller, these are harsh words; where you pick them up I can’t think⁠—not from me. Well, well, I suppose there must be an end to the pleasantest of functions. Good night, good night.”</p>
			<p>The door closed behind Mike and himself. For ten minutes shufflings and whisperings went on in the corridor, but nobody touched the handle.</p>
			<p>Then there was a sound of retreating footsteps, and silence reigned.</p>
			<p>On the following morning there was a notice on the house-board. It ran:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<header>
					<p>Indoor Games</p>
				</header>
				<p>Dormitory-raiders are informed that in future neither <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Psmith nor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jackson will be at home to visitors. This nuisance must now cease.</p>
				<footer>
					<p>
						<span epub:type="z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Psmith.</span>
						<br/>
						<span epub:type="z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Jackson.</span>
					</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
